# Quantifying and Alleviating Bottlenecks for Vector Databases in Datacenter Settings
## High Level Problem and Motivation:
Vector databases like ChromaDB are widely used in datacenters for AI-related tasks, such as knowledge retrieval. Vector databases rely on memory for indexing, so performance can be sensitive to cache availability. In a datacenter setting, though, the presence of many other applications might take away from this cache space, and so we would like to first measure the performance (tail latency) of varying vector database queries (small sized chunks up to large sized chunks) under various external application loads. If there is a quantifiable effect of external load on the performance of the vector database, we would then like to explore some potential strategies to improve the performance. This may involve looking into some isolation techniques like CPU pinning or limiting the memory usage of external applications. 


## Related Work:
	Works exploring specifically vector database performance in data center settings are sparse. One work, by Ockerman et. al, characterize performance of Qdrant (another vector database system) specifically in the context of distributed systems. This work was able to optimize indexing performance by leveraging more worker nodes, though it was not able to perform significant retrieval optimizations due to the main bottleneck for this operation being the network (small queries were used, so network was a more significant bottleneck). The paper, however, did not test the impact of external, noisy applications on the performance - which is something we aim to do.
	We plan to look into more related works on the topic throughout the project lifecycle.

## Plans for Design, Implementation, Evaluation
	Our design will focus on isolating the impact of resource contention (L3/LLC and memory) on the tail latency of vector retrieval. To achieve this, we will model a client-server workload, where a client makes queries to the server hosting the vector database. The database, ChromaDB, will be populated with synthetic data of enough size to ensure the index fits partially or fully in memory. In addition, we will also model a third-party application that is aggressive enough in its work to result in resource contention for the server. In interest of time, we may leverage built-in Linux primitives like stress-ng to achieve this behavior. For the optimization approach, we may explore designs that pin the database to specific cores using the taskset Linux primitive as well as designs that limit the resources used by the aggressor using cgroups.
	For the implementation, we will implement the testbed on a bare-metal Linux server. If needed, we could also run the experiments on a virtualization (via QEMU or Docker), ensuring consistent results. As mentioned earlier, we will be testing ChromaDB, and will be using a variety of Bash/Python scripts to launch the database, aggressor, and client. For the client implementation, we will likely explore some traffic patterns (e.g. burst) rather than rely on a solely random query pattern. From this, we will log the measured latencies, paying close attention to P99 latencies since tail performance is of interest.
	For our evaluation, we will focus on quantifying how significantly (if any significance at all) the presence of external noise influences the recorded P99 latencies. With this, we will also try to identify what the root cause of this performance degradation (if any) is - whether it is from CPU cycles or cache misses (memory). Lastly, we will evaluate whether our proposed optimizations result in better performance from the initial, optimization-free experiment.
